# Advanced Statistical Physics: Lecture 10
# $II$ Phase transitions and critical phenomena
## $1^\circ$ Thermodynamics of Phase Transition
## 1.1 Simple fluids
#### Clausius-Clapeyron relation
*[[ASP 2024-10-31|continued]]*

Thus, phases $A$ and $B$ can coexist when the [[20230729145443|chemical potentials]] $\mu_A=\mu_B$ are equal.

### [[20231111163639|phase transition]]
A phase transition of first order is described by a singularity / discontinuity in the first derivative of the [[20230403093920|thermodynamic potential]].

## 1.2 Van der Waals gas
### Van der Waals gas
Typically, particles interact with a potential between atoms or molecules. This distinguishes this model from the [[20221104144059|ideal gas]].

The interaction consists of a short-ranged repulsion and a long-ranged attraction.[^1] Both interactions are required to explain [[20231111163639|phase transitions]].

[^1]: This can be modeled with e.g. the [[20230531125913|Lennard-Jones-Potential]].

In a classical model, $N$ particles interact with a potential $\omega(r)$, depending on the distance $r$. In principle, the thermodynamic properties can be derived from the *partition function*. However, this is a very difficult practice.

A possible approach is to start with an [[20221104144059|ideal gas]] and use perturbation theory to extend the model.

The repulsion (described by $b$) increases the pressure, while the attraction (described by $a$) decreases pressure. $b$ is the excluded volume per particle, i.e. their size, while $a$ describes the attraction. At the critical point, $\partial_V P$ vanishes. This happens at a critical pressure $P_c$ with a critical volume per particle $v_c$.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    P &=& \frac{Nk_BT}{V-bN} - \frac{aN^2}{V^2} \\
    v_c &=& 3b \\
    k_BT &=& \frac{8}{27} \frac{a}{b} \\
    P_c &=& \frac{a}{27b^2}
\end{eqnarray}
$$

At $\partial_V P=0$, the [[20241011110411|compressibility]] $\kappa_t=\partial_P V$ becomes infinite and for $\partial_VP>$, it is negative. The latter is not a stable state. Thus, the system is not homogeneous but contains a gas and a liquid phase. In this case, the curve $P(V)$ does not make sense physically.

### 1.2.a Virial expansion
The Virial expansion extends the model of the [[20221104144059|ideal gas]] for the *Van der Waals gas*.

It expands the *grand-canonical partition function* $Y$ with the *fugacity* $z$. It uses the *canonical partition function* $Z(N)=Z(T,V,N)$.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    Y(T,V,\mu) &=& \sum_{N=0}^\infty Z(N)\exp[\beta\mu N] \\
    \ln Y &=& Z(1) + \left(Z(2) - \frac{Z(1)^2}{2}\right)z^2 \\
    z &=& \exp[\beta\mu]
\end{eqnarray}
$$

In the ideal gas, the particles are independent. In this case, the fugacity expansion terminates after the first order. For the ideal gas, the fugacity $z$ consists of the density $\rho$ and the *thermal de Broglie wavelength* $\lambda_\mathrm{th}$.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    Z(N) &=& \frac{1}{N!}Z(1)^N \\
    \Rightarrow Y &=& \exp[Z(1) z] \\
    \Rightarrow \ln Y &=& Z(1) z \\
    z &=& \rho \lambda_\mathrm{th}^3 \\
    \lambda_\mathrm{th} &=& \sqrt{\frac{2\pi}{mk_BT}}\hbar
\end{eqnarray}
$$

From this, the physical meaning of the expansion can be explained. They are caused by $Z(2)$, which depends on the interaction potential $\omega$. From this, the *equation of state* follows. The leading order of correction is described by the *first virial coefficient* $B_2(T)$.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    PV &=& k_BT\ln Y \\
        &=& k_BTN(1 + B_2(T)\rho + \mathcal O(\rho^2)) \\
    B_2(T) &=& - 2\pi \int_0^\infty r^2 (\exp[-\beta \omega(r)] - 1) \dd{r}
\end{eqnarray}
$$

Higher orders of expansion are required to explain [[20231111163639|phase transitions]].

### 1.2.b mean-field approximation
Assume independent particles subjected to an effective potential, which is generated by the other particles, like gravitation or the electromagnetic interaction.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    Z(N) &=& \frac{Z(1)^N}{N!} \\
    Z_1(1) &=& \lambda_\mathrm{th}^{-3} \int_V \exp[-\beta w_\mathrm{eff}(\vec r)] \dd[3]{r}
\end{eqnarray}
$$

The inverse *thermal de Broglie wavelength* $\lambda_\mathrm{th}^{-3}$ describes the *kinetic energy*. The effective potential $w_\mathrm{eff}(\vec r)$ shall be attractive with $\bar\omega<0$, if the particles don't touch. This is described by the *excluded radius* $r_\mathrm{ex}$, which denotes the volume of a particle. From this, the *free energy* $F$ can be derived.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    \omega(r) &=& \bar\omega \theta(r_\mathrm{ex}) \\
    Z_1(1) &=& \lambda_\mathrm{th}^{-3} (V - V_\mathrm{ex}) \exp[-\beta\bar\omega] \\
    F &=& k_BT\ln Z \\
        &\approx& -k_BTN\left(\ln \frac{Z(1)}{N} + 1\right)
\end{eqnarray}
$$

Assuming the excluded volume $V_\mathrm{ex}$ from the excluded volume per particle $b$ and the attraction by other particles as $\bar\omega$, the *equation of state* for the *Van der Waals gas* follows. The repulsion (described by $b$) increases the pressure, while the attraction (described by $a$) decreases pressure.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    V_\mathrm{ex} &=& bN \\
    \bar\omega &=& -a \frac{N}{V} \\
        &=& -a\rho \\
    \Rightarrow P &=& -\pdv{F}{V} \\
        &=& \frac{Nk_BT}{V-bN} - \frac{aN^2}{V^2}
\end{eqnarray}
$$

*[[ASP 2024-11-07|to be continued ...]]*