# Advanced Statistical Physics: Lecture 26
# $II$ Phase transitions and critical phenomena
## $4^\circ$ Scaling and Renormalization
### Renormalization groups for the GL functional
[[ASP 2025-01-15|continued]]

The *power counting* is the change of parameters under rescaling steps $\vec r \mapsto \vec r/\ell$ and $\vec q \mapsto b\vec q$. The dimensional analysis using $[\phi]=\ell\frac{2-d}{d}$ leads to $r^\prime$ and $u^\prime$.


$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    \beta\mathcal F
        &=&
            \int \dd[d]{r}
                \frac{1}{2}(\nabla \phi)^2
                + \frac{1}{2} \vec r \phi^2
                + \frac{1}{4} \vec u \phi^4
            \\
    r^\prime &=& b^2 r \\
    u^\prime &=& b^{4-d} u
\end{eqnarray}
$$

In the *Gaussian model* with $u=0$, the rescaling step is the full $Rb$. Thus, the *Gaussian fixed point* is at $r=0$ and $u=0$ with the temperature eigenvalue at $b^2=b^{4t}$, with $y_t=2$ and $\nu=1/y_t=0.5$. The dimension of the [[20230827163117|magnetic field]] is $[h]=[\phi]^{-1}\ell^{-d}=\ell^{-(1+\frac{d}{2})}$. The eigenvalue is $h=b^{y_h}h>0$, thus the relevant variable is $y_h=1+\frac{d}{2}$. $y_t$ and $y_h$ are critical exponents of the Gaussian fixed point. This $d$-dependent exponent coincides with the *mean-field exponents* in four dimensions $d=4$.

It follows that $u$ is the relevant perturbation of the Gaussian fixed point for $d<d_>=4$ dimensions. The RG-flow for $d<4$ can also be described.

The *power counting* only describes the effect of rescaling. When $u\neq 0$, there are additional contributors from $\exp[-\beta\mathcal F[\phi_s]]$.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    \exp[-\beta\mathcal F[\phi_s]]
        &=&
            \int \mathcal D \phi_s
                \exp[-\beta\mathcal F[\phi_>],\phi_<]]
\end{eqnarray}
$$

Assuming $u\ll1$, these contributions can be calculated perturbatively.[^1] For the following, consider infinitesimal rescaling with very small $s\ll 1$ and $b=\exp[s]\approx 1+s$. This treats $s$ as a continuous variable, leading to $u^\prime=\exp[\varepsilon s]u$ and the expansion parameter $\varepsilon=4-d$.

[^1]: cf. Kardar M.: Statistical Physics of Fields (2007), Cambridge University Press, DOI [10.1017/CBO9780511815881](https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511815881) , Chapter 5

Then, the continuous flow equation is the [[20230903105431|differential equation]] $\dv{u}{s}=\varepsilon u$. The contribution from integrating over $\phi_<$ will produce a quadratic term from $\dv{u}{s}=\varepsilon u-\vec A u^2$.

Thus, a new stable fixed point emerges for $A,\varepsilon>0$ at $u^*=\frac{\varepsilon}{A}$, while the Gaussian fixed point at $u=0$ is unstable. For nearly $4$ dimensions, $\varepsilon\ll 1$ leads to $u^*\ll 1$. Thus, $u^*$ or $\varepsilon$ can be used as an expansion parameter.

For $A,\varepsilon<0$, the Gaussian fixed point is locally stable, and a new unstable fixed point emerges.

For $A<0,\varepsilon>0$ no stable fixed point exists, while for $A>0,\varepsilon<0$ the Gaussian fixed point is only one.

The explicit flow for $(r,u)$ can be calculated by the dimensionless rescaled parameters $\tilde r=r/\Lambda^2$ and $\tilde u=u/\Lambda^{4-d}$. This yields to the following flow equations, with the aria of a $d$-dimensional unit sphere $K_d$. The second term in the equation for $\tilde u$ is caused by the elimination of small-scale fluctuations $\phi_<$.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    \dv{\tilde r}{s} &=&
        2\tilde r
        + \frac{1}{2} K_d
            \frac{\tilde u}{1+\tilde r} \\
    \dv{\tilde u}{s} &=&
        \underbrace{\varepsilon \tilde u}_\text{power counting}
        - \underbrace{\frac{3}{2} K_d
            \frac{\tilde u}{(1+\tilde r)^2}
        }_{\text{elimination of } \phi_<}
\end{eqnarray}
$$

For $\varepsilon>0$, a *Wilson-Fisher fixed point* emerges, which is stable in one direction, but unstable for in temperature direction. For $\varepsilon<0$, the WP fixed point is in the unphysical region.[^2]

[^2]: cf. Kardar M. , Chapter 5

The linerization around $r^*,u^*$ leads to the following results.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    \tilde r &=& r^* + \delta r \\
    \tilde u &=& u^* + \delta u \\
    \Rightarrow
    \dv{s} \begin{pmatrix} \delta r \\ \delta u \end{pmatrix}
        &=&
            \begin{pmatrix}
                \overbrace{2 - \frac{\varepsilon}{3}}^\text{thermal EV}
                    & \frac{K_d}{2}(1+\frac{\varepsilon}{6}) \\
                0
                    & \underbrace{-\varepsilon}_\text{irrelevant}
            \end{pmatrix}
\end{eqnarray}
$$

## $5^\circ$ Kinetics of first order phase transitions
It is of interest, how a system evolves in time towards [[20230301091751|thermal equilibrium]], when it is prepared in either in an *unstable* or a *meta-stable* state.

This will lead to *spatial homogeneity* / *spacial patterns* with a time-dependent length scale.

For example, an *Ising model* above the *critical temperature* $T_C$ is "quenched"[^3], i.e. brought to a [[20230403104255|temperature]] $T<T_C$ abruptly. This causes complex [[20231111130821|domain]] structures. Since this is energetically expensive, over long time $t\rightarrow\infty$, the elimination of interfaces will create a stable state with simple domain structure, e.g. two domains. The length scale $L(t)\propto t^n$ will increase over time.

[^3]: deutsch: abgeschreckt

### 5.1 basic phenomenology
Assume a *Van-der-Waals gas* as an example. The *isotherm* at $T<T_C$ is complex *(see plot)*.

The stability criterion is defined by positive [[20241011110411|compressibility]] $\kappa_T=-V^{-1}\pdv{V}{P}>0$. In the coexistence region, the *Maxwell construction* is applied. The section with $\kappa_T<0$ are unphysical, such unstable. However, also sections with $\kappa_T>0$ are defined as *meta-stable*, when they are also part of the Maxwell construction.

In the $T-\rho$-Diagram, the phase boundary is a curve separating the stable phase from the unstable or meta-stable phase. Similarly, a curve called *spinodal* separates the meta-stable phase from the unstable phase. Inside the spinodal, the system is unstable. Between the spinodal and the phase boundary, the system is meta-stable.

Thus, two qualitatively different scenarios emerge. In scenario $I$, the quenched state is in the unstable state, which is also called *spinodal decomposition*. In this case, each state is locally unstable and each domain will change locally, before a large-scale order will establish

Scenario $II$ describes quenching into a meta-stable state, causing so-called *nucleation*. For example, an external field may be applied, making the positive phase stable and the negative phase meta-stable. The meta-stable global state could be a completely negative state. If a small droplet switches orientation to positive, it will not grow but switch back. If the droplet is large enough, it will grow until the complete area is positive, and thus in the stable state.

*[[ASP 2025-01-22|to be continued ...]]*

# Literature
1. Kardar M: *Statistical Physics of Fields* (2007), Cambridge University Press, DOI [10.1017/CBO9780511815881](https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511815881) , Chapter 5
