# Advanced Statistical Physics: Lecture 22
# $II$ Phase transitions and critical phenomena
## $4^\circ$ Scaling and Renormalization
### 4.2 Renormalization of the Ising chain
> Thanks for coming and also for bringing some Christmas spirit.

[[ASP 2024-12-18|continued]]

#### Decimation of the Ising chain
```ditaa

   ^       ^   ^           ^
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|-->
       v           v   v       v

   1   2   3
```

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    Z_L(K, h)
        &=& \sum_{\sigma_1}\dots\sum_{\sigma_L}
            \exp\left[
                \underbrace{K\sum_i \sigma_i\sigma_{i+1}}_{\beta J}
                + \underbrace{h\cdot \sum_i \sigma_i}_{\beta h}
            \right] \\
        &=& \sum_{\sigma_1}\dots\sum_{\sigma_L}
            \left(
                \sum_{\sigma_1}\dots\sum_{\sigma_{L-1}}
                \exp[-\beta H(\sigma_1, \dots, \sigma_L)]
            \right)
\end{eqnarray}
$$

The sum over component $i$ is described by a hyperbolic cosine $\cosh$. This can be written as an effective interaction between the spins $\sigma_{i\pm1}$, including the field acting on both.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    \sum_{\sigma_i=-1}^1
            \exp[K\sigma_i(\sigma_{i-1}+\sigma_{i+1}) + h\sigma_i]
        &=& 2 \cosh(K(\sigma_{i-1}+\sigma_{i+1}) + h) \\
    2 \cosh(K(\sigma_{i-1}+\sigma_{i+1}) + h)\qquad \\
        \cdot
            \exp\left[\frac{1}{2}h(\sigma_{i-1}+\sigma_{i+1})\right]
        &\overset{!}{=}&
            \exp\left[
                K^\prime\sigma_{i-1}\sigma_{i+1}
                + \frac{1}{2} h^\prime(\sigma_{i-1}+\sigma_{i+1})
                + 2 K_0^\prime
            \right]
\end{eqnarray}
$$

From this, the demoted chain has an Ising energy of $H^\prime$.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    K^\prime
        &=& \frac{1}{Y} \ln\left(
                \frac{\cosh(2K+h)\cosh(2K-h)}{\cosh^2 (h)}
            \right) \\
    h^\prime
        &=& \frac{1}{2} \ln\left(
                \frac{\cosh(2K+h)}{\cosh(2K-h)}
            \right) \\
    K_0^\prime
        &=& \frac{1}{8} \ln\left[
                16\,\cosh(2K+h)\cosh(2K-h)\cosh^2(h)
            \right] \\
    -\beta H^\prime(\sigma_2,\dots,\sigma_L)
        &=& LK_0^\prime
            + K^\prime\sum_i \sigma_{2i}\sigma{2_i+1}
            + h^\prime\sigma_{2i} \\
    \Rightarrow
    Z_L(K, h) &=& Z_{L/2}(K^\prime, h^\prime)\exp[LK_0^\prime]
\end{eqnarray}
$$

##### without external field
Without an external field, $h=0$ leads to $h^\prime=0$. In this case, $K^\prime=f(K)\equiv\frac{1}{2}\ln[\cosh2K]$ follows. For small $K\rightarrow0$, it is proportional to the square $K^\prime\propto K^2$. For large $K\rightarrow\infty$, it is proportional $K^\prime\propto K$.

In multiple iterations, e.g. $K_3=K^{\prime\prime}=f(f(K_1))$, a so-called *cobweb-plot* can be used to describe the development of $K_i$, which becomes small. Thus, $K=0$ is a *stable fixed point*.[^1]

[^1]: See the digression regarding iterative maps (below) for explanation.

However, it needs to be computed if another fixed point is exists. To do this, the variable $x\in[0,1]$ is defined.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    x &\equiv& \mathrm e^{-K} \\
    \Rightarrow
    x^\prime &\equiv& \mathrm e^{-K^\prime} \\
        &=& \exp\left[
                -\frac{1}{2}\ln\left(\frac{1}{2}(x^{-2}+x^2)\right)
            \right] \\
        &=& \left(
                \sqrt{\frac{1}{2}(x^-2+x^2)}
            \right) \\
        &\equiv& f(x)
\end{eqnarray}
$$

For $x=0$, the fixed point $x=0$ follows from $f(x)=0$ for $K\rightarrow\infty$. For $x=1$, a stable fixed point $x=1$ follows for $K=0$. Thus, the state flows from $K=\infty$ to $K=0$, as depicted in the following flow diagram.

Since $K=\beta J$, the destination drives the system to higher temperatures, unless the initial [[20230403104255|temperature]] is $T=0$.

```ditaa
 |---->---->---->---->---->---->---->----|---> x
 0                                       1

 |---->---->---->---->---->---->---->----|---> K
inf                                      0

```

##### with external field
For high [[20230403104255|temperatures]] with $K\rightarrow 0$, the magnetic field does not change due to $h^\prime=h$. For low temperatures, the magnetic field increases due to $h^\prime=2h$.

In the following flow diagram, the curves for $h\neq0$ are smooth curves, which could not be depicted in this ASCII graphic. The line with $K=0$ is a line of fixed points.
```ditaa
h ^                           | 
  |                           ^
  |--<---                     ^
  |      ----<----            ^
  |               -----<------^
  |                           ^
  |                           ^
  +---<---<---<---<---<---<---|---> K
  |                           v
  |                           v
  |               -----<------v
  |      ----<----            v
  |--<---                     v
  |                           |

  0                          inf
```

The unstable fixed point at $T=0$ reflects the "*critical point*" of the Ising chain, where the *correlation length* $\xi\propto \exp[2\beta J]$ diverges.

The expected flow diagram for a system with finite temperature with a critical point, e.g. the $2d$ Ising model, depicts the flow away from the critical point. There is a *critical fixed point* at $(K_c,h=0)$, which is repulsive in both directions of $K$ and $h$.

```ditaa
h ^                           | 
  |           ^               |
  |           ^               |
  |           ^               |
  |           ^               |
  |           ^               |
  |           ^               |
  +---<---<---o--->--->--->---|---> K
  |           v               |
  |           v               |
  |           v               |
  |           v               |
  |           v               |
  |                           |

  0                          inf
```

The critical exponents $y_t, y_h$ are associated with the linearization of the RG-Flow near the critical point.

#### Digression: Iterated Maps
##### iterated map
An *iterated map* is chain of mappings $X\rightarrow X^\prime=f(X)$. The iteration can be interpreted as a discrete time dynamical system $X_{t+1}=f(X_t)$.

##### fixed point
A *fixed point* is the point $X^*=f(X^*)$, where the value doesn't change anymore. These points can be either stable or unstable.

One example is the *logistic map* $f(x)=rx(1-x)$ with $x\in[0,1]$, which describes a parabola with a fixed point at $x_0=0$. Depending on $r$, a second fixed point $x_1>0$ can exist. This is a case of *deterministic chaos*.

##### stability
Consider a small perturbation around a fixed point $X^*$ with a small $|\varepsilon_t|\ll 1$.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    X_t &=& X^*+\varepsilon_t \\
    X_{t+1} &=& X^* + \varepsilon_t \\
        &=& f(X^*) + \varepsilon_t f^\prime(X^*) \\
        &=& X^* + \varepsilon_t f^\prime(X^*) \\
    \varepsilon_{t+1} &=& f^\prime(X^*) \varepsilon_t \\
    \Rightarrow
    \varepsilon_{t+n} &=& (f^\prime(X^*))^n \varepsilon_t \\
\end{eqnarray}
$$

For $|f^\prime(X^*)|<1$, the fixed point is stable for $\varepsilon\rightarrow0$ and unstable for  $\varepsilon\rightarrow\infty$.

#### Decimating the $2d$ Ising model
In decimation, each second spin shall be excluded. I.e., the nearest neighbours are removed from the sublattices. Thus, the number of spins $N\mapsto \frac{N}{2}$, the *lattice spacing* $a\mapsto \sqrt{2}a$ and $2a\equiv b\mapsto \sqrt{2}$, because two sublattices of equal size exist.

Each spin $\sigma_0$ has $4$ next neighbours $\sigma_i$. To evaluate the sum, all $2^4=16$ configurations need to be evaluated. This needs to be matched to the Ising energy $H^\prime$ on the second sublattice.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    H^\prime &=&
        \sum_{\sigma_0=-1}^1
            \exp[K\sigma_0(\sigma_1+\sigma_2+\sigma_3+\sigma_4)] \\
        &=& 2\cosh[K(\sigma_1+\sigma_2+\sigma_3+\sigma_4)]
\end{eqnarray}
$$

To archive this, non-Ising terms need to be included into $H^\prime$. This proliferation of new interactions causes the RG-flow to be not constrained to the $(K,h)$-plane anymore.

On the other side, the additional interactions will turn out to be irrelevant.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    H^\prime
        &=& 2\cosh[K(\sigma_1+\sigma_2+\sigma_3+\sigma_4)] \\
        &=& \exp\left[
                K_0^\prime
                + K_1^\prime
                \cdot
                    \underbrace{(
                        \sigma_1\sigma_2
                        + \sigma_2\sigma_3
                        + \sigma_3\sigma_4
                        + \sigma_4\sigma_1
                    )}_\text{Ising}
            \right.\\
        &=& \left.
            \underbrace{
                + K_2^\prime(\sigma_1\sigma_3+ \sigma_2\sigma_4)
                + K_3^\prime\sigma_1\sigma_2\sigma_3\sigma_4
            }_\text{non-Ising}
            \right]
\end{eqnarray}
$$

*[[ASP 2025-01-08|to be continued ...]]*