# Advanced Statistical Physics: Lecture 4
## $I$ Microscopic and Macroscopic Degrees of Freedom

### $2^\circ$ Diffusion
*[[ASP 2024-10-16|continued]]*

##### hydrodynamic limit
A first continuum can be reached in the hydrodynamic limit. This supposes the steps are taken at a rate $\Gamma$ and the step size is microscopic $(\ell\rightarrow 0)$, with $n=\Gamma t$ and a finite $\Gamma \ell^2\equiv 2D$.

##### diffusion constant
This leads to the *diffusion constant* $D$, in the unit $\frac{\mathrm{length}^2}{\mathrm{time}}$. This leads to a [[20241016101000|Probability of simple Random Walks]] $P$ as follows.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    P(\vec R(t))
        &=& \left(\frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi Dt}}\right)^d
            \exp\left[-\frac{R^2}{4Dt}\right]
\end{eqnarray}
$$

This solves the 2nd Diffusion Equation, with the initial condition of the particle starting in a certain position $\vec R$, described by the [[20230303204120|Deltafunktion]] $\delta(\vec R)$.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    \frac{\partial P}{\partial t} &=& D\nabla^2P \\
    \left.P(\vec R)\right|_{t=0} &=& \delta(\vec R)
\end{eqnarray}
$$

##### Wiener process / Brownian motion
Brownian motion describes a [[20221026123304|random walk]] with $n\rightarrow \infty$ in a continuous limit.

The idea is to "squish together" a random walk into a unit time, rendering it continuous. However, it is nowhere smooth or differentiable, but it is *scale invariant*.

The process is called *Brownian scaling*.

###### Brownian scaling
The positions $X_i$ of a [[20221026123304|random walk]] are connected with a continuous line, rendering it $\{\tilde X_s\}_{0\le s\le n}$, for a constant $n$. This is converted to $\{B^{(n)}_t\}_{0\le t\le1}$.

While $s$ denotes the distance between the points, $t$ denotes the time required for $n$ steps. In the limit $n\rightarrow\infty$, it becomes the *Brownian motion* $B_t$.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    B^{(n)}_t &=& \frac{1}{\sqrt{n}} \tilde X_{t\cdot n} \\
    t &=& \frac{s}{n} \\
    \braket{B^{(n)}_t} &=& 0 \\
    \Rightarrow \braket{(\Delta B^{(n)}_t)^2} &=& t \\
    B_t &=& \lim_{n\rightarrow\infty} B^{(n)}_t
\end{eqnarray}
$$

###### scale invariance
Scale invariance describes an object that looks the same regardless of scale. E.g. the *Mandelbrot-Menge* looks the same, regardless on how far is zoomed in.


### 2.2 other universality classes
Under which continuous does the [[20230223130500|CLT]] fail?

##### 2.2.1 Levy Flights
Consider a [[20221026123304|random walk]] with steps $\vec \ell_i$ and $\braket{\vec \ell_i}=0$ and diverging [[20221028194035|variance]] $\braket{(\Delta \ell)^2}=\infty$. One example is the *Cauchy distribution* $p(\ell)$.

###### Cauchy distribution
The [[20221028194709|expected value]] is $\braket{\ell}=0$, but the [[20221028194035|variance]] $\braket{(\Delta \ell)^2}=\infty$ diverges. Thus, single $\ell$ are very much larger than most other and dominate the sum of many steps. In this case, the [[20230223130500|central limit theorem]] fails.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    P(\ell) &=& \frac{1}{\pi} \frac{1}{1+\ell^2} \\
\end{eqnarray}
$$

For large $\ell$, the tail of the probability $P(\ell\gg 1)$ can be approximated by an exponential function, with a  parameter $\mu$.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    P(\ell\gg 1) &=& \ell^{-(\mu+1)} \\
    P(\ell>x) &=& \int_x^\infty \ell^{-(\mu+1)} \dd{\ell} \\
        &\propto& x^{-\mu}
\end{eqnarray}
$$ 
###### extreme value statistics
Extreme value statistics considers the most extreme values, e.g. asks for the largest value.

For example, given the following relation for $N$, the largest value $\hat x$ shall be estimated. This is done by setting $N=1$.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    N &\propto& n x^{-\mu} \\
    N &\overset{!}{=}& 1 \\
    \Rightarrow 1 &\propto& n \hat x^{-\mu} \\
    \Leftrightarrow \hat x &\propto& \sqrt[\mu]{n} \\
\end{eqnarray}
$$

##### 2.2.1 Self-avoiding Random Walk
A self-avoiding random walk is a [[20221026123304|random walk]] that does not allow returns to an already used position. If the random walk would visit a formerly visited position, it stops instead. Thus, it can trap itself.

It can be compared to a game of snake (possibly in higher dimensions), but while hitting random keys.

For up to $3$ dimensions, such a walker will be stuck on the long term. For at least $5$ dimensions, such a random walk will not re-visit positions.

###### Fleury's Argument
Fleury[^1] analyzed the *self-avoiding random walk* for less than $3$ dimension.

The argument uses [[20230825125343|thermodynamics]]: re-visiting is allowed, but it costs energy. Then, the *free energy* $F$ of a polymer with $n$ links, given the end-to-end distance $R(n)$ at [[20230301091751|thermal equilibrium]].

Assume $N_\mathrm{int}$ intersections are used and each requires an energy $U$. The [[20230829190239|entropy]] $S$ is described by the number $\Omega$ of random walks with $n$ steps and distance $R$.

Here, $\Omega_0$ describes the number of random walks in $d$ dimensions with $n$ steps. $c$ is a constant. 

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    F &=& E - TS \\
    E &=& N_\mathrm{int} \cdot U \\
        &\propto& \frac{n^2}{R^d} U \\
    S &=& k \ln \Omega \\
    \Omega &\propto& \Omega_0\exp[-\frac{R^2}{2n\ell^2}] \\
    \Rightarrow S &=& k\ln \Omega_0 - \frac{kR^2}{2n\ell^2} \\
    \Rightarrow F
        &\approx& \frac{n^2}{R^d} U
            - T S_0
            + c \frac{TR^2}{n} \\
        &=& F_0
            + \frac{n^2}{R^d} U
            + c \frac{TR^2}{n}
\end{eqnarray}
$$

For small $R$, $F(R)$ gets very large. Now, the optimal distance $R^*$ can be calculated. This yields to the *Fleury exponent* $\nu_f$.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    \frac{\partial F}{\partial R} &=& 0 \\
    \Rightarrow R^* &=& \left(\frac{n^3U}{2cT}\right)^{1/(d+2)} \\
        &\approx& n^{\nu_f} \\
    \nu_f &=& \frac{3}{d+2}
\end{eqnarray}
$$


[^1]: Chemist, worked on polymers and got a Nobel price

*to be continued ...*
