# Advanced Statistical Physics: Lecture 7
# $I$ Microscopic and Macroscopic Degrees of Freedom
## $2^\circ$ [[20250219162904|Diffusion]]
## 2.4 driven diffusion
*[[ASP 2024-10-24|continued]]*

Beware of typos / errors, also in every textbook! *Constant vigilance!*[^1]

[^1]: Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire

### 2.4.2 non-equilibrium particles on a ring
#### many particles on the ring
##### Stationary Current
The *stationary current* $J_{i,i+1}$ describes the average flow of particles from position $i$ to $i+1$.

For the [[20231012095625|ASEP]] on a closed ring, it can be computed as follows from the probability $\braket{\eta_i(1-\eta_{i+1})}$, describing the state for an occupied position $i$ and a vacant position $i+1$. The latter is calculated from the number of matching configurations divided by the number of possible calculations, similar as the *micro-canonical partition function*. It can be described by the density $\rho$.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    J_{i,i+1} &=& p\braket{\eta_i(1-\eta_{i+1})}
            - (1-p)\braket{\eta_{i+1}(1-\eta_i)} \\
    \braket{\eta_i(1-\eta_{i+1})}
        &=& \frac{\text{\# configurations with }\eta_i=1,\eta_{i+1}=0}
            {\text{\# configurations}} \\
        &=& \frac{{L-2 \choose N-1} }{{L \choose N}} \\
        &=& \frac{(L-N)N}{L(L-1)} \\
        &=& \frac{(1-\rho)\rho}{1-L^{-1}} \\
    \lim_{\overset{L\rightarrow\infty}{N\rightarrow\infty}}
    \braket{\eta_i(1-\eta_{i+1})} &=& \rho(1-\rho) \\
    \Rightarrow J(\rho) &=& p(\rho(1-\rho)) - (1-p)\rho(1-\rho) \\
        &=& (2p-1)\rho(1-\rho)
\end{eqnarray}
$$

In the *hydrodynamic limit* with fixed density $\rho=\frac{N}{L}$, a simple statement follows, describing a [[20241030083454|Bernoulli measure]]. In a finite system, the probability is larger.

The current-density relation $J(\rho)$ describes a parabola with a maximum at $\rho=0.5$. For higher densities $\rho>0.5$, the current $J$ decreases because of the exclusion.

In Traffic research this is called a *fundamental diagram*, which can be described by the *Nagel-Schreckenberg model*.

### Hydrodynamic equation for the TASEP
The Hydrodynamic equation is an analogue to the *diffusion equation*, applied to the symmetric model.

In [[20231012095456|TASEP]], the probability to move to the right is set to $p=1$. Consider the time evolution of a slowly varying density profile $\rho(x)$. The *lattice spacing* shall be small $(a\rightarrow0)$, especially compared to the length $\ell\gg a$ of density variation.

The density has to satisfy a [[20230812130544|continuity equation]], since the number of particles is conserved:
$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    \pdv{t} \rho(x,t) + \pdv{x}j(x,t) &=& 0
\end{eqnarray}
$$

For a small region $\xi$ on the lattice, where $a\ll \xi \ll \ell$, the density $\rho(x)$ is almost constant. Therefore, the local current $j$ must correspond to the current in the hydrodynamic limit.
It leads to a [[20230903110117|PDE]] of first order in $x$, which is non-linear.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    \lim_{\overset{a\rightarrow0}{\ell\rightarrow\infty}} j(x,t) &=& J(\rho(x,t)) \\
    \Rightarrow \pdv{\rho}{t} + \pdv{J}{x} &=& 0 \\
    \Rightarrow \pdv{\rho}{t} &=& - \pdv{x} \rho(1-\rho) \\
        &=& \underbrace{- \pdv{\rho}{x}}_{\text{convection term}}
            + \underbrace{2\rho\pdv{\rho}{x}}_{\text{Burgers nonlinearity}}
\end{eqnarray}
$$

The convection term can be removed by a *Galilei transformation* to a moving frame:

Define the field $\phi$ trough $\rho(x,t)=\phi(x-t,t)$. $\phi$ satisfies the *inviscid* *Burgers equation*, i.e. with viscosity $\nu=0$.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    \pdv{\rho}{x} &=& \pdv{\phi}{x} \\
    \pdv{\rho}{t} &=& -\pdv{\phi}{x} + \pdv{\phi}{t} \\
        &=& - \pdv{\rho}{t} + \pdv{\phi}{t} \\
    \Rightarrow \pdv{\phi}{t} &=& \pdv{\rho}{t} + \pdv{\rho}{x} \\
        &=& 2\rho\pdv{\rho}{x} \\
        &=& 2\rho\pdv{\phi}{x}
\end{eqnarray}
$$

#### small fluctuations
For **small fluctuations** $\Phi(x,t)$ around the constant density with $|\Phi|\ll1$. In this case, the initial profile $\Phi_0$ translates the lattice. Thus, $c$ is the *kinematic wave speed*. This again is the derivative of the *stationary current* $J$.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    \rho(x, t) &=& \bar \rho + \Phi(x,t) \\
    \Rightarrow \pdv{\rho}{t} = \pdv{\Phi}{t}
        &=& - J^\prime(\bar \rho + \Phi) \\
    J^\prime(\rho) &=& 1-2\rho \\
    \Rightarrow \pdv{\Phi}{t} + c\pdv{\Phi}{x} &=& 0 \\
    \Rightarrow \Phi(x, t) &=& \Phi(x-ct, 0) \equiv \Phi_0(x-ct) \\
    c(\bar\rho) &=& 1-2\bar\rho
\end{eqnarray}
$$

The average movement can be positive or negative. If $\bar\rho<0.5$, a positive movement (forward), but for $\bar\rho>0.5$, it is negative. This also explains why traffic jams move backwards in space.

##### kinematic wave speed
The kinematic wave speed is the derivative of the *stationary current* $J$.

#### shock formation
Next **shock formation** is researched. A formal solution can be developed by the *method of characteristics*. This can be interpreted as a propagating density initial density $\rho(x,0)$ at the kinematic wave speed $c(\rho)$.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    \pdv{\rho}{t} &=& -\pdv{x} J(\rho) \\
        &=& - c(\rho) \pdv{\rho}{x} \\
\end{eqnarray}
$$

The *characteristics* are space-time lines of constant density, i.e. tracking the time-development of a selected density. These characteristic can collide, when some densities move forwards and others move backwards. Collisions of characteristics cause shocks.

##### Shock formation
The densities become discontinuous from a smooth profile

#### Burgers equation
The burgers equation describes the viscosity $\nu$ of a fluid and is related to the *Navier-Stokes eqation*. It looks similar to the *hydrodynamic equation for the TASEP*.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    \pdv{u}{t} &=& - u\pdv{u}{x} + \nu\pdv[2]{u}{x}
\end{eqnarray}
$$

The viscosity smoothens the non-linearity. This is oppoesed to the Navier-Stokes equation, where the velocity increases non-linearity.

#### Navier-Stokes equation
The Navier-Stokes equation from fluid dynamics, describing the fluid velocity $\nu$ dependent on pressure $P$ and density $\rho$.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    \dv{u}{t} &=& \pdv{\vec u}{t} + \vec u \cdot \nabla \vec u \\
        &=& \nu\nabla \vec - \frac{1}{\rho} \nabla P
\end{eqnarray}
$$

The *scalar product* $u \cdot \nabla \vec u$ describes non-linearity caused by convection.


*[[ASP 2024-10-31|to be continued ...]]*