# Advanced Statistical Physics: Lecture 8
# $I$ Microscopic and Macroscopic Degrees of Freedom
## $2^\circ$ [[20250219162904|Diffusion]]
## 2.4 driven diffusion
### 2.4.2 non-equilibrium particles on a ring
#### shock formation
*[[ASP 2024-10-30|continued]]*

> Next **shock formation** is researched. A formal solution can be developed by the *method of characteristics*. This can be interpreted as a propagating density initial density $\rho(x,0)$ at the kinematic wave speed $c(\rho)$.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    \pdv{\rho}{t} &=& -\pdv{x} J(\rho) \\
        &=& - J^\prime(\rho) \pdv{\rho}{x} \\
        &=& c(\rho) \pdv{\rho}{x}
\end{eqnarray}
$$

If the density has a range such that the kinematic wave speed $c(\rho)$ is positive for some and negative for other densities, shocks will form.

In [[20231012095456|TASEP]], shocks are sharp even on a microscopic scale. With viscosity, no shocks will form, but they can be derived as a limit for steep curves.

Shocks can be measured with a so-called *second-class particle*, which works as a movable bar for measurement.

##### Method of characteristics
The *characteristics* are space-time lines of constant density, i.e. tracking the time-development of a selected density. These characteristic can collide, when some densities move forwards and others move backwards. Collisions of characteristics cause *shocks*.

Let $\xi(x_0, t)$ describe the position of a density segment, that was initially at $x_0$. This function can be inverted to $x_0(\xi, t)$, assuming inversion is possible. Then $\rho(x,t)=\rho(x_0(x,t), 0)$ solves the [[20230903110117|PDE]].

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    \xi(x_0, t) &=& x_0 + c(\rho(x_0, t))\cdot t
\end{eqnarray}
$$

At $t=0$, $\xi$ describes the identity. Over time, the curve goes flatter, since $c(\rho<0.5)$ is positive and $c(\rho>0.5)$ is negative. Finally, $\xi$ develops a minimum and a maximum. This curve is multi-valued. For a certain area, $x_0$ will be a multi-valued curve. This is an nonphysical solution. The physical solution can be found with the *Maxwell construction*, causing a shock.

##### Time of the appearance of shocks
The time $t_s$, at which a *shock* appears, can be described by the slope at the steepest point.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    t_s &=& \frac{1}{2a_\mathrm{max}} \\
    a_\mathrm{max} &=& \max_x\left\{\dv{x}\rho(x, 0)\right\}
\end{eqnarray}
$$

##### Position and Motion of the shock
The position and the motion of the shock can be computed from mass conservation. The integral over the density profile has to stay constant. This is similar to the *Maxwell construction*.

If the currents left and right of the shock are not equal, the shock moves with a speed $v$.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    J(\rho_\mathrm{R}) - J(\rho_\mathrm{L})
        &=& v(\rho_\mathrm{R} - \rho_\mathrm{L}) \\
    \Rightarrow v
        &=& \frac{J(\rho_\mathrm{R}) - J(\rho_\mathrm{L})}
            {\rho_\mathrm{R} - \rho_\mathrm{L}}
\end{eqnarray}
$$

This explains backwards movement of *traffic jams*: As long as the influx is larger than the outflux, the jam moves backwards.

####  shock dynamics
Multiple shocks can collide and merge, if they have different speeds. After long times, these states still reach [[20230301091751|equilibrium]].

# $II$ Phase transitions and critical phenomena
A phase transition is a singular[^1] behavior of macroscopic degrees of freedom upon variation of macroscopic control parameters at fixed microscopic interaction.

[^1]: i.e. non-smooth and non-analytic

## $1^\circ$ Thermodynamics of Phase Transition
## 1.1 Simple fluids
### Phases & phase diagram
A typical phase diagram looks like the following. However, water is anormal[^2].

[^2]: The curve for water has a negative slope between solid and liquid.

```ditaa
^ P
|    |
|    |
|    +--------
|   /
|  /
| /
|/
+------------|------> T
```

The *critical point* $(T_C,P_C$) is at critical [[20230403104255|temperature]] $T_C$ and critical [[20230829113605|pressure]] $P_C$, where the difference between liquid and gas vanishes. Further, the *triple point* $(T_T,P_T)$ is the point where all three phases coexist.

Phase coexistence implies [[20230301091751|equilibrium]] under particle exchange, governed by the [[20230729145443|chemical potential]] $\mu(T,P)$.

For two phases $A$ and $B$, the equality $\mu_A=\mu_B$ defines a line in the $(T,P)$ plane. For three phases $A,B,C$, the equality of all three potentials defines a point in the same plane.

With more species of components, more phases may coexist, according to *Gibbs phase rule*.

Changing between solid and liquid state breaks symmetries, while changing between liquid and gas doesn't. Thus, not all substances require a liquid-gas-transition, because particles are ordered randomly anyways. This also explains the *superfluid phase*, where there is no difference between liquid and gas, after the coexistence line terminated at $(T_C,P_C)$.

#### Gibbs phase rule
Gibbs phase rule describes the number of free *degrees of freedom* $\varphi$. This is described by the number of components $n$ and the number of phases $r$.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    \phi &=& (n+2) - r
\end{eqnarray}
$$

The shape of lines of coexisting phases is described by the *Clausius-Clapeyron relation*.

#### Clausius-Clapeyron relation
The Clausius-Clapeyron relation describes the shape of the line of coexisting phases $A$ and $B$.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    \dv{P_{AB}}{T} &=& \frac{s_B-s_A}{v_B-v_A} \\
        &=& \frac{q_{AB}}{T(v_B-v_A)} \\
    q_{AB} &=& T(s_A-s_B)
\end{eqnarray}
$$

$s_i$ describe the [[20230829190239|entropy]] per particle, while $v_i$ describe the [[20241010092336|volume]] per particle in each phase. Alternately, $q_{AB}$ describes the [[20231111163808|latent heat]], while $T$ describes the [[20230403104255|temperature]].

*[[ASP 2024-11-06|to be continued ...]]*