# Advanced Statistical Physics: Lecture 20
# $II$ Phase transitions and critical phenomena
## $3^\circ$ Landau theory and Gaussian fluctuations
### 3.5 Order parameters with continuous symmetry
[[ASP 2024-12-11|continued]]

### 3.6 Thermal Roughening
Thermal roughening is a weak effect influencing the surface separating different phases of matter are. It's transitions are closely related to *Kosterlitz–Thouless transitions*.

These surfaces are [[20241010094135|invariant under transition]]. In the following graphic, the surface would be invariant in $z\rightarrow z+c$ with $c\in\mathbb R$.

For the separation between solid and a fluid, a one-dimensional discrete [[20241010094135|translational symmetry]] is $z\rightarrow z+an$, where $a$ is the *lattice space* and $n\in\mathbb Z$. The solid itself has a $3d$ discrete translational symmetry.

```ditaa
z ^
  |       gas
  |
  |~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
  |
  |     liquid
  +------------------------> x
```

#### Roughening
A continuous $1d$ [[20241010094135|translational symmetry]] may be restored at a [[20230403104255|temperature]] $T_R<T_m$, which is smaller as the melting temperature $T_m$. This means that the surface melts, before the full body melts.

The rough configuration has a higher energy, but also a higher [[20230829190239|entropy]]. Thus, it can be thermodynamically stable at temperature $T_R$. This is described by the *solid-on-solid model*.

Roughness can be defined by the height difference *correlation function*.
$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    \braket{(h(\vec x) - h(\vec x^\prime))^2} &=& C(|\vec x - \vec x^\prime|) \\
    \lim_{|\vec x - \vec x^\prime|\rightarrow 0}
        C(|\vec x - \vec x^\prime|) &=&
            \begin{cases}
                <\infty &: \text{smooth} \\
                \infty &: \text{rough}
            \end{cases}
\end{eqnarray}
$$

##### smoothness
Thus, smoothness is a long-ranged order in the height $h$. It describes a discrete [[20241010094135|translational symmetry]] in the height.

#### Landau theory for liquid-gas transition
The [[20240104140318|Landau theory]] for the roughening transition shall be derived. Similar to the *solid-on-solid model*, the surface is described by a height function $z\equiv h(x,y)\equiv h(\vec x)$

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    h(\vec x) &=& z \\
    \vec x &=& (x,y) \in \mathbb R
\end{eqnarray}
$$

We consider the liquid-gas interface. The surface with area $A$ has *free energy* $\mathcal F$ per unit area $\gamma$. This is related to *tension*, but uses energy instead of *forces*.

In one dimension, the surface area is the length of the curve. The surface length in one dimension $d=1$ can be described by the *theorem of Pythagoras*, which needs to be integrated.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    \mathcal F &=& \gamma\cdot A \\
    \qq*{1d:} L &=& \int \sqrt{1+\left(\pdv{h}{x}\right)^2} \dd{x} \\
    \Rightarrow\qq*{2d:} A &=& \int \sqrt{1+(\nabla h)^2} \dd[2]x
\end{eqnarray}
$$

For small fluctuations, a [[20230303210116|Taylor expansion]] can be applied. Here, $(x,y)\in[0,L]^2$ are applied. From this, the free energy $\mathcal F$ follows. Again, the *Gaussian model* applies with $a=0$, or the *spin-wave approximation* to the *XY-field* follows. Thus, the previous results can be applied.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    \sqrt{1+(\nabla h)^2} &\approx& 1 + \frac{1}{2}(\nabla h)^2 \\
    \mathcal F &=& \gamma A \\
        &\approx& \gamma \int 1 + \frac{1}{2}(\nabla h)^2 \dd[2]x \\
        &=& \gamma L^2
            + \underbrace{\frac{1}{2}\int \gamma(\nabla h)^2 \dd[2]x}
            _{\text{Gaussian model at }a=0}
\end{eqnarray}
$$


The liquid-gas interface is roughened by *capillary waves*; for large distance the surface will be *rough*.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    C(|\vec x - \vec x^\prime|)
        &=& \frac{k_BT}{\pi\gamma}
            \ln(\Lambda|\vec x - \vec x^\prime|) \\
    \lim_{|\vec x - \vec x^\prime|\rightarrow\infty}
        C(|\vec x - \vec x^\prime|) &=& \infty
\end{eqnarray}
$$

#### Theory for solid-fluid transition: pinning potential
A solid introduces preferred positions of $h$ at $h=na$ with $n\in\mathbb Z$. These boundary conditions need to be implemented in the model for the *fluid-gas transition*.

Due to the periodic dependency, a so-called *pinning potential* $V_p(h)$ is introduced. The *free energy* $\mathcal F$ looks similar to the *Ginzburg-Landau functional* for *Ising-like* [[20231111163639|phase transitions]].

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    V_p(h) &=& -V_0 \cos\left(2\pi\frac{h}{a}\right) \\
    \Rightarrow \mathcal F &=&
        \gamma \int \frac{1}{2}(\nabla h)^2 + V_p(h(x)) \dd[2]x \\
\end{eqnarray}
$$

If the pinning potential $V_p(h)$ is strong enough, it is able to *localize* the surface, i.e. to smoothen it. For small potentials $V_p$, the *perturbation argument* can be applied. Here, the average $\braket{V_p(h)}|_{V_0=0}$ with respect to the height distribution $P_0(h)$ in the absence of $V_p$ is calculated.

In this model, $P_0(h)$ is a [[20230223132329|Gaussian distribution]] with [[20221028194035|variance]] $W^2$. This $W^2$ can be computed using (the ??) $C(|\vec x - \vec x^\prime|)$. In especially long distances $|\vec x - \vec x^\prime|$ are interesting. This describes the *pinning energy* $E_p$.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    E_p &=& \braket{\int V_p(h(x)) \dd[2]x} \\
        &=& L^2\braket{V_p(h)}|_{V_0=0} \\
    C(|\vec x - \vec x^\prime|) &=& \braket{(h(\vec x)-h(\vec x^\prime))^2} \\
        &=& \underbrace{\braket{h(\vec x)^2}+\braket{h(\vec x^\prime)^2}}_{2W^2}
            - \underbrace{2\braket{h(\vec x)h(\vec x^\prime)}}_{
                \rightarrow 0 \text{ for } |\vec x - \vec x^\prime|\rightarrow \infty} \\
    P_0(h) &=& \frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi W^2}} \exp\left[\frac{h^2}{2W^2}\right] \\
    \Rightarrow W^2 &=& \frac{k_BT}{2\pi\gamma} \ln(\Lambda L)
\end{eqnarray}
$$

Next, the average pinning potential is required to calculate the *pinning energy* $E_p$. A [[20231111163639|phase transition]] occurs when $\eta=2$. From this, the *roughening temperature* $T_R$ can be derived.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    \braket{V_p(h)} &=& -\frac{V_0}{2}
        = (L\Lambda)^{-\eta} \\
    \eta &=& \frac{\pi k_BT}{a^2} \\
    \Rightarrow
    E_p &\propto& L^{2-\eta} \\
    \Rightarrow
    T_R &=& \frac{2}{\pi} \frac{a^2\gamma}{k_B}
\end{eqnarray}
$$

For higher [[20230403104255|temperatures]] $T>T_R$, the pinning energy vanishes  $E_p\rightarrow0$. This renders the pinning irrelevant ant the surface is *rough*.

For smaller temperatures $T<T_R$, the surface is pinned to one height. This causes a flat, *smooth* surface.

#### comparison to Kosterlitz–Thouless transition

|              |                                          Kosterlitz–Thouless                                           |                                              Roughening                                               |
| :----------: | :----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------: | :---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------: |
|              |                                    $\frac{k_BT_c}{g}=\frac{\pi}{2}$                                    |                               $\frac{k_BT_R}{\gamma a^2}=\frac{2}{\pi}$                               |
| fluctuations | $\braket{(\phi(\vec x)-\phi(\vec x^\prime))^2}=\frac{k_BT}{\pi g}\ln(\Lambda\|\vec x-\vec x^\prime\|)$ | $\braket{(h(\vec x)-h(\vec x^\prime))^2}=\frac{k_BT}{\pi \gamma}\ln(\Lambda\|\vec x-\vec x^\prime\|)$ |
|   for $T$:   |                                                $T<T_C$                                                 |                                                $T>T_C$                                                |

##### duality
Different problems can be mapped onto each other, but e.g. high- and low-[[20230403104255|temperature]] phases may be comparable.

The low-temperature phase of the *XY-model* maps to the high-temperature phase of the *roughening problem*.

*[[ASP 2024-12-18|to be continued ...]]*