# Advanced Statistical Physics: Lecture 16
# $II$ Phase transitions and critical phenomena
## $2^\circ$
###  $2.?$
[[ASP 2024-11-21|continued]]
The transfer matrix needs to be diagonalized. This leads to eigenvalues $\Lambda_\mathrm{even}$ and $\Lambda_\mathrm{odd}$, that can be degenerate. The *coupling* $K=K^*$ (with $K=\beta J$) leads to the *critical point* with $\sinh(2K_C)=1$.

Below the critical [[20230403104255|temperature]], at $K<K_C$ and $\Lambda_e>\Lambda_o$, the *free energy* $F=-k_BT \ln Z$ is extensive (?). Here, $L$ refers to the [[20241010092336|volume]] of the system, which describes the number of [[20230814144242|spins]].

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    \Lambda_\mathrm{even} &=&
        \sqrt{2\sinh 2K}
        \exp\left[\frac{1}{2}\sum_q \epsilon(q) \right] \\
    F &=& -k_BT \ln Z \\
        &=& -\frac{1}{\beta} L \ln(\Lambda_e) \\
        &\propto& L^2
\end{eqnarray}
$$

The free energy per spin $f$ can be derived. It has a singularity at $Q(K_C)>1)$. cf. Trishka & Bergersen (?), also cf their notation.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    f &=& \frac{F}{L^2} \\
    \beta f &=& -\ln(2\cosh 2K)
        - \frac{1}{\pi} \int_0^{\pi/2}
            \ln\left(\frac{1 + \sqrt{1-Q^2\sin^2\theta}}{2}\right) \dd{\theta} \\
    Q(K) &=& \frac{2\sinh 2K}{\cosh^2 2K}
\end{eqnarray}
$$

The *specific heat* c(T) has a weak logarithmic divergence. The [[20231030091047|magnetization]] $m(T<T_C)$, the susceptibility $\chi$ and the *critical isotherm* $m|_{T=T_C}$ can be derived.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    c(T) &\approx& -\frac{2k_B}{\pi} (2K_C)^2 \ln\left|\frac{1-T}{T_C}\right| \\
    m(T) &=& \pm \left(1-\frac{(1-\tanh^2 K)^4}{16\tanh^4 K}\right)^{1/8} \\
    T\approx T_C\Rightarrow m(T) &\approx& (T-T_C)^{\beta} \\
    \qq*{with} \beta &=& \frac{1}{8} \\
    \chi &\approx& |T-T_C|^{-\gamma} \\
    \gamma &=& \frac{7}{4} \\
    m|_{T=T_C} &\approx& h^{1/\delta} \\
    \delta &=& \frac{1}{15}
\end{eqnarray}
$$

Further, the *correlation function* $\braket{\sigma_i\sigma_j} - \braket{\sigma_i}{\sigma_j}$ can be described by the correlation length $\xi(T)$, only for $T\neq T_C$. Otherwise, the power-law decay of correlation is to be applied.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    T\neq T_C:\qquad
        \braket{\sigma_i\sigma_j} - \braket{\sigma_i}{\sigma_j}
        &\approx& \exp\left[-\frac{|i-j|}{\xi}\right] \\
    \xi(T) &\approx& |T-T_C|^{-\nu} \\
    \nu &=& 1 \\
    T= T_C:\qquad
        \braket{\sigma_i\sigma_j} - \braket{\sigma_i}{\sigma_j}
        &\approx& |i-j|^{-(d-2+\eta)} \\
        &\approx& \sqrt[4]{|i-j|} \\
    \eta &=& \frac{1}{4}
\end{eqnarray}
$$

# $3^\circ$ Landau theory and Gaussian fluctuations
### [[20240104140318|Landau theory]]
The Landau theory is a general, model-independent formulation of the *mean field theory*.

### Gaussian fluctuations
Gaussian fluctuations are often an appropriate treatment of *fluctuations*.

## 3.1 The Landau free energy
### [[20231111164000|order parameter]]
An [[20231111164000|order parameter]]  $\Phi$is a thermodynamic quality that allows distinction between *phases*.

For example, the density of a liquid or gas differs below the critical point, but is identical above the critical point with $\Delta \rho=0$. Also, the [[20231030091047|magnetization]] is the order parameter of [[20231030093100|magnetism]].

In phase transitions of second [[20231111164227|order]], the order parameter varies continuously.

#### Idea to derive free energy
1. Write the free energy as a function $f$ of the [[20231111164000|order parameter]] $\Phi$.
2. $|\Phi|$ is small, thus a [[20230303210116|Taylor expansion]] of $f(\Phi)$ can be applied.
3. keep the lowest order terms that are allowed by symmetry.
4. The equilibrium value of $\Phi$ is obtained by minimising $f(\Phi)$.

##### without magnetic field
Without an external [[20230827163117|magnetic field]] $h=0$, symmetry enforces $f(\Phi)=f(-\Phi)$. A [[20230303210116|Taylor expansion]] can be applied for small [[20231111164000|order parameters]] $\Phi$.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    f(\Phi) &=& \underbrace{f(0)}_0 + \frac{1}{2} a \phi^2 + \frac{1}{4} b \Phi^4 + \mathcal O(\Phi^6)
\end{eqnarray}
$$

With $a,b>0, $\Phi=0$ minimises $f(\Phi)$ at [[20230301091751|equilibrium]], since $f(\Phi)$ is a parabola. However, for $a<0,b>0$, $f$ describes a [[20230809130413|double-well]] with two minima at $\Phi=\pm\Phi_0$.

For $a,b<0$, the function diverges at $f(|\Phi|\rightarrow\infty)=-\infty$. In this case, the 6th order of the Taylor expansion is required, since this does not describe a thermodynamically sensible state.

To describe an *Ising*-like transition, $b>0$ has to be applied. Also, $a\approx T-T_C$ describes the dependence of [[20230403104255|temperature]] $T$ and *critical temperature* $T_C$.

##### with magnetic field
Applying an external [[20230827163117|magnetic field]] $h\neq0$, symmetry is broken. A [[20230303210116|Taylor expansion]] can be applied for small [[20231111164000|order parameters]] $\Phi$.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    f(\Phi,T,h) &=& \underbrace{f(0)}_0 + \frac{1}{2} a \phi^2 + \frac{1}{4} b \Phi^4 + \mathcal O(\Phi^6) - h\Phi
\end{eqnarray}
$$

This shifts the function $f(\Phi)$ compared to the case without field $h=0$. Unless the field is strong, the minima for $a<0,b>0$ are at different heights. Thus, one of the minima as a local minimum, but the other is a global minimum.

The [[20221028194709|expected value]] $\braket{\Phi}$ changes discontinuously under continuous variation of parameter $a$ or the external field $h$. Thus, the [[20231111163639|phase transition]] is of first [[20231111164227|order]] below the *critical temperature* $T_C$, but discontinuous above.

##### critical exponents
Minimising the free energy describes the external field $h$ by the parameters $a$ and $b$.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    \pdv{f}{\Phi} &=& 0 \\
    \Rightarrow h &=& a\Phi + b\Phi^3 \\
    a &\approx& T-T_C
\end{eqnarray}
$$

With $h=0$, the minimal free energy can be derived for the 

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    h=0:\qquad -a\Phi &=& b\Phi^3 \\
    a>0: \Phi_0 &=& 0 \\
    a<0: \Phi^2 &=& \frac{a}{b} \\
        &\propto& T-T_C \\
    \Rightarrow \Phi_0 &=& \sqrt{-\frac{a}{b}} \\
        &\propto& \sqrt{T-T_C} \\
    \Rightarrow \beta &=& \frac{1}{2}
\end{eqnarray}
$$

*[[ASP 2024-12-04|to be continued ...]]*